feat: add blog on physical backup (#1)
tanmoysrt/tanmoysrt.dev: posts/physical-backup-restore.md

---
title: "Physical Backup & Restoration"
description: "Physical Backup & Restoration"
date: "2025-04-09"
is_redirect: false
redirect_url:
---

> In Frappe Cloud, every **Site Update** triggers an automatic backup - ensuring your data stays safe in case of failures and we can rollback your site to older version as soon as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Frappe Cloud, every site update triggers an automatic backup - ensuring your data stays safe in case of failures and we can rollback your site to older version as soon as possible.
```

I'd suggest toning down text formatting everywhere. It should be done sparingly.

As of now, we use `mysqldump` to take logical backup your site's database.

```
mysqldump \
  --single-transaction --quick \
  --lock-tables=false \
  -u root -psecret \
  _c678923hj223 \
  > backup.sql
```

> This works fine !

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works fine.
```

Use `!` sparingly. In this case you also want to continue the sentence to setup the section. E.g. "This works fine for the most part but it doesn't scale well with growing database sizes.

### Issues

1. **High Disk I/O :** When backing up your large database, MariaDB needs to read all data from disk and convert each table/row into SQL queries. As your database grows:
	- The database need to perform more work
	- Required more disk i/o
	- Impact overall server performance

2. **Backup Time :** In `mysqldump` based backup process, the duration depends completely on database size.

	Each operation requires :
	- Reading data from disk
	- Converting each table definition and rows to SQL queries
	- Write those data to \*.sql file.

	So, the backup duration grows proportionally with database size.

	Take a glimpse of that -
	![](https://frappe.io/files/logical-backup.png)

	If you have some site with more than 10GB of database size, you need to wait ~10 minutes before even starting with actual update.

> 	> BTW, Frappe Cloud gives you an option to **Skip Backup** as well. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	> BTW, Frappe Cloud gives you an option to skip backup as well. 
```
Same feedback as before

	> 
	> But that's like playing with 🔥 in a production site. If something goes wrong, you need to fix it on production yourself. Resulted in more downtime.

    <p align="center">
        <img style="max-width: 300px" src="/files/meme435384.png" />
    </p>

### Simple Solution - Take Disk Snapshot

> Just take disk snapshot of database server because AWS EBS Snapshot, ZFS Snapshot is just a few seconds operation.

Reviewer: In this section, I'd suggest grouping these single sentences into 2-3 coherent paragraphs. It's easier to read than separate lines. 

Essentially:
- Setting up an obvious solution
- Why that obvious solution doesn't work for us

At this point, if you take a look at the database folder you will find different kind of files.
```list
/var/lib/mysql/
	|- _cdsd32dsvn92
		|- __global_search.frm  <- No need to backup
 		|- __global_search.MYI  <- Backup
		|- __global_search.MYD  <- Backup
		|- tabUser.cfg          <- Backup
		|- tabUser.ibd          <- Backup
		|- tabUser.frm          <- No need to backup
		...
```

Out of this, **\*.cfg** file is the new one for InnoDB. It's important to import the tablespace back in another database server. That file holds information about your **\*ibd** files.

We have now all the data with us. But, we are missing one thing still. If you just look inside your database servers `/var/lib/mysql/` folder, you will find many **\*.frm** file in sub-directories.

This **\*.frm** files hold the structure and column definitions of a table but these are not importable in live database 😢.

 So, we need to take backup of table structure to recreate them back later. We can use mysqldump for that purpose.

```
mysqldump _cdsd32dsvn92 --no-data > schema.sql
```

You can either now take disk snapshot or copy those files to another directory/disk/remote server whatever you prefer .

> _FYI, In Frappe Cloud, currently we are using AWS EBS Snapshot for physical backup purpose. Because EBS Snapshot is time consistent and take 3~5 seconds to create._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Frappe Cloud, currently we are using AWS EBS Snapshot for the physical backup purpose, because EBS Snapshot consistently only takes 3~5 seconds to create.
```

In general: Run your draft through Grammarly/some LLM tool. Few typos/grammer issues here and there.

Also, no need for italics.

🎉 Finally, we have our physical backup ready which consists the data + table definitions.

### Time For Physical Restoration

We will first take the simple approach to do the restoration and later will discuss about each problem and their solution.

> **Steps -**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Steps:**
```

Nitpick: Use headings wherever possible and avoid bold for section titles.

	
	 If you need help for extracting `CREATE TABLE` query for a table with regex, take a look [here](https://github.com/frappe/agent/blob/69084c59fda37e5ee08854e0a893d01116c2b303/agent/database_physical_restore.py#L387-L403). 

4. **Restore Data :** Data restoration varies by storage engine. Let's see one by one.
	1. **InnoDB Restoration (Using Transportable Tablespaces)** 
		- **Discard the tablespace :** 
			```
			ALTER TABLE tabUser DISCARD TABLESPACE;
			```
			If you check inside the `/var/lib/mysql/<database-name>` folder, you will notice `tabUser.ibd` has been disappeared.
		- **Copy backup files :**
		  Paste `tabUser.ibd` (data) + `tabUser.cfg` (metadata) from backup to the same folder.
	    - **Import tablespace :**
			```sql
			ALTER TABLE tabUser IMPORT TABLESPACE;	
			```
		 If the above step gets completed, that means you have successfully imported the data to that live database.

	2. **MyISAM Restoration :**
		- Acquire a write lock on the table.
		- Copy these files from backup to `/var/lib/mysql/<database-name>`:
			- `*.MYI` (index)
			- `*.MYD` (data)

6. Physical  Restoration Completed 🤞

---

> ### Problems and Solutions

Reviewer: Here you can setup the upcoming section better IMO.

2. Unexpected database server crashes
3. Hardware failure

In most of the cases,

- The index file (**\*MYI**) got corrupted.
- The data file (**\*MYD**) stays safe.

MyISAM comes with a utility called [`myisamchk`](https://mariadb.com/kb/en/myisamchk/) to check and fix corruption and you don't need to run database to do the fixtures.

Just run,
```
myisamchk -r /var/lib/mysql/_c8383gdu339jd8/__global_search
```

It can solve 99% of problem. So, before attempting restoration we check for corruption in MyISAM table files and fix corruption.

If that fails, we will not attempt restoration.

After restoration also, we found some instances where MyISAM Table was marked as corrupted.

![](https://frappe.io/files/myisam-corruption.png)

In this MyISAM restoration procedure, we just copy files. That doesn't update the index position and some metadatas.

So after restoration we check for corruption using

```
CHECK TABLE <table-name>
```

If we find any error, we will repair that using
```
REPAIR TABLE <table-name>
```

> We are using `CHECK TABLE` instead of `myisamchk` in post-restoration phase because it's unsafe to use `myismchk` tool while database is running.

> #### The FULLTEXT Index Restoration Challenge

Reviewer: I'd suggest picking the top 3 interesting problems and only discussing them. 

I forgot to say this during your mocks and realized during talk. The lazy loading part is so interesting that going from that to a minor index corruption feels weird while reading.

Reviewer: Reason for suggestion: You're trying to tell a story here, not a step-by-step prescription for how to implement it :)

- 10GB of files took ~16 minutes
- Max speed capped at ~5MBPS

**Root Cause**

AWS provision volume from snapshot instantly but it can't provide expected performance due to lazy loading.

Initially, EBS volume is on uninitialized state. It loads the disk blocks as on demand.

![](https://frappe.io/files/ebs-lazy-loading.png)

For this, we are not able to cross more than ~5MBPS read speed. 

**Failed Experiments**

1. **AWS-recommended process for pre-warming -** AWS suggests to use `dd` or `fio` to pre-warm your volume ([ref](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ebs/latest/userguide/ebs-initialize.html)). But, we are not able to cross more than 15~20 MBPS read speed due to sequential read of `dd`.
2. **Parallel `dd` processes -**  We thought let's run 5 dd process parallaly to get ~80MBPS speed. But, that causes -
        - Severe CPU overhead
        - High iowait congestion

**The Solution: io_uring**

We built a custom library leveraging Linux’s [`io_uring`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Io_uring) which provides support for asynchronous IO.

The tool is written in **Golang** and we wrote a python wrapper to make it easy to integrate.

> Thus, we are able to cross almost ~300MBPS (90% of EBS gp3 disk) speed at pre-warm stage without much cpu overhead.

Reviewer: Same feedback as before. Group these sentences into coherent paragraphs.
